JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
SAMANTHA POWER, U.S. Ambassador
to the United
Nations: I think about Syria
when I go to
bed at night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I sit down with
outgoing U.N.
Ambassador Samantha Power to
talk the crisis
in Syria, the threat of Russia,
and more.
Then: how cities are helping
chronically sick
patients cut back on expensive
emergency room
visits by getting to the root of
America's
health issues.
DR.
JEFFREY BRENNER, Camden
Coalition of Healthcare
Providers: I think we're in a
20-year arc
of recalibrating and rethinking
what is health
and what is health care, what is
the purpose
of our health care system, what
are we trying
to accomplish?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And The Obama
Years series
continues with a look at race in
America under
the nation's first black
president.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Donald Trump
faces a growing Democratic
boycott this evening,
with his inauguration ceremony
just three
days away.
Congressman John Lewis and
nearly 50 House
Democrats say they will not
attend.
Lewis had said it would be the
first inauguration
he's missed in 30 years.
His office corrected that today,
but Mr. Trump
tweeted that the congressman's
statement is
-- quote -- "Wrong or lie.
He boycotted Bush 43 also
because he thought
it would be hypocritical to
attend."
Trump followed up later on FOX
News.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: I think
he just grandstanded, John
Lewis, and then
he got caught in a very bad lie.
So, let's see what happens.
As far as other people not
going, that's OK,
because we need seats so badly.
I hope they will give me their
tickets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Trump flew to
Washington
tonight for a dinner honoring
Tom Barrack,
a longtime friend who heads the
Inauguration
Committee.
Meanwhile, Russian President
Vladimir Putin
accused the Obama administration
of trying
to sabotage the president-elect.
Putin dismissed reports that the
Kremlin has
compromising information on Mr.
Trump, including
using prostitutes in Moscow
during a Miss
Universe pageant.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): I do not know Mr.
Trump.
I have never met him.
I do not know what he will do on
the international
scene.
So I have no grounds for
attacking him, criticizing
him for something or protecting
him in any
way.
We won't even appeal to the
Nobel Prize Committee
if he is awarded with a Nobel
Prize.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
rejected Putin's
criticism, and said -- quote --
"There is
a pretty stark divide here."
President Obama today commuted
the prison
sentence of Chelsea Manning for
passing classified
military and diplomatic files to
WikiLeaks.
The former U.S. Army
intelligence analyst
is serving a sentence of 35
years.
She is one of 209 inmates who
received commutations
today.
Another 64 received pardons.
Charlie Savage is covering the
story for The
New York Times.
Charlie Savage, remind us what
Chelsea Manning
was originally charged with.
CHARLIE SAVAGE, The New York
Times: Hi.
Yes, thanks for having me on.
So, when Chelsea Manning was
arrested in 2010
and charged with passing
documents to WikiLeaks,
she was charged with numerous
accounts of
violating the Espionage Act and
also was charged
with aiding the enemy, which is
essentially
the military justice system's
version of treason.
She was convicted of the
Espionage Act charges,
most of them, but was acquitted
of aiding
the enemy.
And she was sentenced to 35
years in prison,
which is dramatically longer
than any other
prison sentence ever carried out
in the American
justice system for a leak case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And do we know
why the president
decided to commute her sentence?
CHARLIE SAVAGE: So, there was a
briefing call
with senior White House
officials after the
commutations and pardons were
announced.
And the senior White House
official -- we
were not allowed to name them
under the ground
rules -- described a little bit
of the president's
thinking about this.
He said, well, she admitted that
what she
had done was wrong and
apologized for it,
and she expressed remorse and
has now been
serving nearly seven years in
prison for it.
And most people who have been
convicted in
leak cases -- there has been
about a dozen,
most of them in the last eight
years -- have
been convicted -- have been
sentenced to one,
two, or three years, not 35.
And so part of this was also the
equity of
making this sentence more in the
range of
what other people accused of
similar conduct
have received.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the question
is, what signal
does this send?
Tonight, the speaker of the
House, Paul Ryan,
has issued a statement saying --
quote -- "This
is just outrageous."
He says: "Chelsea Manning's
treachery put
American lives at risk and
exposed some of
our nation's most sensitive
secrets."
And he says, "The president now
leaves in
place a dangerous precedent that
those who
compromise our national security
won't be
held accountable for their
crimes."
CHARLIE SAVAGE: That's one of
many statements
like that coming out of
Republicans on the
Hill.
We haven't heard yet from
president-elect
Trump on this, but that
statement is reflected
by what other people like
Senator McCain and
others have said.
I would say, as a point of just
clarification,
none of the documents that
Chelsea Manning
leaked were classified above the
nearly classified
level.
That is to say, none of them
were top-secret.
That was another thing that the
White House
discussed today in comparing her
to Edward
Snowden, who President Obama
declined to pardon.
So, to say they're some of the
most sensitive
secrets is an exaggeration.
And also military prosecutors at
her court-martial
didn't accuse her or present any
evidence
that anyone was actually killed
as a result
of her leaks.
On the other hand, the
government did scramble
afterward to move some people
out of potential
harm's way who were named in
some of the documents
as having helped American
diplomats or troops
in very dangerous countries,
lest they come
to harm.
So the fact that no one was
killed didn't
mean that it wasn't indeed
putting some people
at risk.
And she has apologized for
having done that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Charlie Savage
with The New
York Times, thank you very much.
CHARLIE SAVAGE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also tonight, new
numbers are
out on the consequences of
repealing Obamacare.
The Congressional Budget Office
assessed a
2016 bill that is the starting
point for this
year's effort.
It found some 18 million
Americans would lose
coverage within a year of
repeal, if there
is no replacement.
The number would climb to 32
million by 2026,
again, assuming nothing replaces
it.
Republicans insisted today that
they will
have a replacement.
The nominee to be secretary of
the U.S. Interior
Department says it's -- quote --
"indisputable"
that climate change is
happening, and that
humans are a big cause.
Montana Representative Ryan
Zinke spoke today
at his Senate confirmation
hearing.
Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders
pressed him
on president-elect Trump's
assertion that
climate change is a hoax.
REP.
RYAN ZINKE (R), Montana: I don't
believe it's
a hoax.
I believe we should...
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont: You
do not believe
it's a hoax?
REP.
RYAN ZINKE: No.
I believe we should be prudent
to be prudent.
That means, I don't know
definitively.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS: If climate
change is already
causing devastating problems,
should we allow
fossil fuel to be drilled on
public lands?
REP.
RYAN ZINKE: Again, we need an
economy and
jobs, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Zinke also said
he is open
to drilling more on public
lands, and that
he will review President Obama's
limits on
drilling in Alaska.
In Turkey, authorities confirmed
they have
arrested an Uzbek national, and
said he confessed
to killing 39 people at an
Istanbul club early
on New Year's Day.
The alleged gunman was captured
late Monday
at this apartment in Istanbul's
suburbs.
The city's governor said
fingerprints there
matched prints from the crime
scene.
The search for a Malaysian
Airlines plane
has ended after three years,
$160 million
and no answers.
Ships with high-tech gear
covered, in all,
nearly 50,000 square miles in
the Indian Ocean
west of Australia.
Today, despite complaints from
family members,
Malaysia, Australia and China
shut down the
official hunt for Flight 370 and
all 239 people
it carried.
There has been a new migrant
disaster in the
Mediterranean.
The International Organization
for Migration
reports that almost 180 people
apparently
drowned when a boat capsized off
Libya over
the weekend.
That is based on interviews with
a handful
of survivors.
British Prime Minister Theresa
May declared
today that her government wants
a clean break
from the European Union.
May laid out her thinking, as
Britain gets
ready to negotiate terms for
leaving the E.U.
She confirmed it means an end to
Britain's
role in Europe's single market
and to travel
without passports, but she also
issued a warning.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: I know
there are some voices calling
for a punitive
deal that punishes Britain and
discourages
other countries from taking the
same path.
That would be an act of
calamitous self-harm
for the countries of Europe, and
it wouldn't
be the act of a friend.
Britain wouldn't, indeed, we
could not accept
such an approach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: May also promised
that Parliament
will be able to vote on the
final deal, likely
in 2019.
Back in this country, big
automakers are announcing
plans for expansions, under
pressure from
president-elect Trump.
Hyundai says that it will boost
its investment
in U.S. plants by 50 percent
over the next
four years.
And General Motors will spend an
additional
$1 billion on its U.S. factories
this year.
And on Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones industrial
average lost nearly 59 points to
close at
19826.
The Nasdaq fell 35, and the S&P
500 slipped
six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I sit down
with U.N. Ambassador Samantha
Power in her
last days in office; the choice
for secretary
of education faces the Senate;
reducing health
care costs by focusing on the
sickest patients;
and much more.
care costs by focusing on the
sickest patients;
and much more.
President-elect Trump's nominee
to be U.S.
ambassador to the U.N., South
Carolina Governor
Nikki Haley, plans to question
why the U.S.
contributes 22 percent of the
U.N.'s budget.
In prepared remarks for her
confirmation hearing
tomorrow, we also learned that
she will criticize
the recent vote condemning
Israeli settlements.
Earlier today, I sat down with
Samantha Power.
She's the outgoing U.S.
ambassador to the
U.N.
We spoke at the State
Department.
And I began by asking why, in
her final speech,
she focused on Russia as a major
threat to
the U.S.
SAMANTHA POWER, U.S. Ambassador
to the United
Nations: There is a fair amount
of competition,
obviously, with ISIL and the
terrorist networks
around the world, China also
posing a different
kind of threat to the
rules-based order.
But I thought it was very
important before
leaving to draw on my eight
years, our eight
years here in these jobs of
privilege that
we have had, to take note of the
pattern that
has developed, particularly in
the last few
years, starting with the
decision by President
Putin to go into Ukraine, to lie
about it,
to take Crimea, to try to annex
it, and then
in Syria to back a regime that
gasses its
people, then to get militarily
involved with
that regime, itself resorting to
tactics that
were outlawed 100 years ago, and
then systematically,
in Europe, backing these
illiberal parties
whose world view is closer to
this kind of
populist authoritarian,
anti-Muslim, anti-diversity
kind of line that has been
pursued in Moscow.
All of that plus, of course, the
most recent
and most egregious example that
hits close
to home for us, which is
interfering in our
elections through hacking,
through fake news,
and with an eye to trying to
help one candidate
win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, when the
president-elect
speaks, as he has often, about
wanting a better
relationship with Russia -- and,
in fact,
one of his advisers has just
said in the last
day or so, he said, the U.S.
needs to find
a way to get along better with
Russia.
He said, we need to focus less
on combating
communism and more on rejecting
radical Islam.
How do you react to that?
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, let me
raise my hand
and say at no point have I been
fighting the
last war and seeking at the U.N.
to combat
communism.
I think we do have an interest
in combating
states that try to cross borders
and steal
parts of other people's country.
We have an interest in combating
tactics in
war that are abhorrent and that
only fuel
terrorism because they incite
people on the
ground.
And we, as Americans, have an
interest in
ensuring that the only people
who get to vote
for our elected leaders are our
citizens,
and not some foreign people who
think that
they have an interest in skewing
our election
in one direction or another.
Look, I think the point that we
all agree
upon is that we have to engage
with Russia.
I have spent, you know, as much
time with
my Russian counterpart as I have
probably
with anybody else, including
close family
members, over the course of the
last fur years.
And we have done really
important work together.
At the same time we're at each
other on Aleppo,
on Ukraine, we're authorizing
peacekeeping
missions, putting sanctions in
place on North
Korea for its nuclear tests.
We need to find means for
cooperation.
I think the potential difference
or the issue
that is going to need to be
adjudicated is,
on what terms?
Are we going to bring historical
amnesia and
pretend as though history is
just starting
on January 21, or are we going
to take into
account egregious violations of
the rules
of the road that may have -- in
the first
instance have predated the
administration,
but that are inevitably going to
continue
if Russia believes that there
are no costs
to its actions, as if all it has
to do is
just wait out the United States,
and then
eventually we will soften our
positions and
forget about what happened?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it sounds
like you're worried
the next administration may be
prepared to
do that.
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, I think
the signals
are very mixed.
And I think that the only time
we will really
know what then-President Trump
is going to
do about the set of challenges
that confront
him is after he has sat down
with his advisers
as the commander in chief, when
he's looking
at the threats and the
intelligence from the
standpoint of being the number
one decider,
when he's hearing from his
secretary of defense,
his chairman, who was the same
chairman President
Obama had, Chairman Joe Dunford,
who is an
outstanding public servant, who
has led our
anti-ISIL effort, on which we're
making great
progress.
And the president, when he is
the president,
will be also developing close
relations with
a series of other world leaders.
So he will be hearing from some
of our closest
European friends and partners
about just how
real the threat feels to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You used as one
of your examples
of Russian aggression the fact
that they stood
by as Syria repeatedly used --
the Syrian
regime repeatedly used chemical
weapons in
the civil war.
If that's the case, then how
does that square
with the decision by the Obama
administration
in 2013 not to have a military
response, the
red line, when President Obama
was seriously
considering doing so and then
didn't?
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, the regime
-- when chemical
weapons were used in 2013,
Russia was absolutely
backing the Syrian regime at
that time.
And we were denouncing the -- of
course, the
gassing of more than 1,000
innocent civilians.
And we denounced Russia's
support for that
regime.
When President Obama came out
and said he
was going to use military force,
that, as
you know, was what brought
Russia forward
to say, hey, hey, hey, wait,
maybe not that
quite -- why don't we try
something else?
Maybe we can work together.
Maybe we can take advantage of
the fact we're,
in effect, the benefactor or the
sponsor of
this regime, where, if you don't
use military
force, we will work with you to
destroy the
chemical weapons program.
Now, interestingly, to this day,
even though
Russia took away the chemical
weapons program,
declared chemical weapons
program by the regime,
Russia, to this day, denies that
it was the
regime that used chemical
weapons.
And it just shows you again how
loose they
are with the truth and how
absurd sometimes
their argument can be.
But I mentioned the sequence
specifically
because I think there is a
misconception,
as we look back at that moment
and the red
line.
You know, I know people have
very strong views
about it.
But it wasn't the case that we
had before
us a set of targets that would
have eliminated
the chemical weapons program.
In fact, we had to stay miles
away when we
struck from the chemical weapons
storage,
for fear of causing terrible
collateral damage
to civilians and so forth.
So, I think reasonable people,
you know, can
look back and say, look, had we
bombed, maybe
things would have turned, and
the opposition
would have started to make gains
on the ground.
But you could say they would
have just used
their chemical weapons.
And the weapon itself was not
something that
our bombing was in a position to
do much about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Syria is such a
big question.
SAMANTHA POWER: And a big mess,
yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still a big mess.
The president and the vice
president and others
have been talking about it in
the last few
days.
In a book that you wrote before
coming into
the administration, you talked
about how the
U.S. historically lacked the
will to intervene
to stop mass atrocities, often
because of
political expediency.
Some people are certainly
looking at what
the Obama administration didn't
do in the
early days of the Syrian
situation to stop
the killing of civilians.
How do you square those two
things?
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, first, I
can tell you
that, in Syria, the president
did everything
he could, short of intervening
militarily.
And so people say, oh, he should
create a
safe haven.
I think those are reasonable
arguments, and
we will debate this.
Historians will debate it.
But there is a very real
question about, in
creating a safe haven, that
means taking out
Syrian air force, because
they're bombing
civilians.
What would then have unfolded,
right?
There are thousands of armed
groups on the
ground.
There's a sectarian, you know,
heterogeneity
that's very hard for us to track
from outside.
Is the case that we can say with
any confidence
that that would have turned the
tide or even
protected the people that we
would have set
out to protect?
So, again, I think people can
argue that that
is a tool that we could have
employed that
we didn't employ.
But I don't think that you can
argue with
any certainty that we would be
in a different
place in Syria right now had we
done that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As you walk away
from serving
in government, is that the
toughest thing
as you look back?
SAMANTHA POWER: By far.
I think about Syria when I go to
bed at night.
When I wake up in the middle of
the night
when I hear one of my kids
coughing or crying,
I think about Syria.
When I wake up in the morning, I
think about
Syria.
But thinking about it a lot and
ending the
war are not the same thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
ambassador
to the U.N., Samantha...
SAMANTHA POWER: For three more
days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For three more
Samantha Power, thank you very
much.
SAMANTHA POWER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now:
president-elect Trump's
pick for secretary of education,
Betsy DeVos.
She is a nontraditional choice
and a power
player in Republican circles.
Her supporters applaud a woman
they see as
a disrupter focused on children.
Her critics worry she will erode
crucial funds
for public schools, and that she
has not been
forthright in her own financial
disclosures.
She is on Capitol Hill as we
speak for her
confirmation hearing.
And it is the focus of our
weekly segment,
Making the Grade.
William Brangham is our guide.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Shortly after
Betsy DeVos'
confirmation hearing began this
evening, she
made one thing clear: She plans
to push for
expanded school choice around
the country,
much as she did during her two
decades as
a major political force in her
home state
of Michigan.
BETSY DEVOS, Education Secretary
Nominee:
Parents no longer believe that a
one-size-fits-all
model of learning meets the
needs -- need
of every child.
And they know other options
exist, whether
magnet, virtual, charter, home,
faith-based,
or any combination.
Yet, too many parents are denied
access to
the full range of options.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: DeVos has
neither taught,
nor worked as an educator or
supervisor in
a school system, but she and her
family, whose
net worth tops $5 billion, have
used that
wealth and influence as
advocates and political
donors to create more charter
schools in Michigan,
and to try legalizing school
vouchers.
Vouchers let parents spend
public money on
private or parochial schools.
She lost the voucher battle in
Michigan, but
still champions their use.
Democrats are worried that DeVos
will undermine
public education across the
country.
SEN.
PATTY MURRAY (D), Washington: We
focus our
federal policies and investments
on strengthening
public schools for all students,
and certainly
not towards diverting taxpayer
dollars to
fund vouchers that don't work
for unaccountable
private schools.
I have major concerns with how
you spent your
career and fortune fighting to
privatize public
education and gut investments in
public schools.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: DeVos'
philosophy fits right
in with president-elect Trump's,
who pledged
during the campaign to provide
$20 billion
in federal support for charter
schools and
vouchers.
Her support for charters, which
are publicly
funded schools, but which
operate independently,
is the subject of particular
scrutiny.
The Detroit Free Press found
that 75 percent
of schools in Michigan performed
better than
charters did, and they had some
of the weakest
oversight in the country.
Supporters point to better gains
by African-American
and Latino students in those
schools.
Today, DeVos tried to assure
senators that
she is not an enemy of public
schools.
BETSY DEVOS: The vast majority
of students
in this country will continue to
attend public
schools.
If confirmed, I will be a strong
advocate
for great public schools.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As the hearing
continued
this evening, educators are also
watching
closely for DeVos' stance on
civil rights,
college affordability and
for-profit colleges.
For more on Betsy DeVos and what
she means
for education in America, I'm
joined by two
people with divergent views
about her.
Randi Weingarten is the
president of the American
Federation of Teachers, one of
biggest teachers
unions in the country, and one
that opposes
her nomination.
And Rick Hess, who's written
several books
about teachers and education,
and is with
the conservative think tank the
American Enterprise
Institute, where Betsy DeVos is
a board member.
Welcome to you both.
RANDI WEINGARTEN, President,
American Federation
of Teachers: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Randi
Weingarten, I would
like to start to you.
RANDI WEINGARTEN: And Rick and I
are good
friends, by the way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And you two
are good friends.
That's good to get out there.
Randi, you heard Betsy DeVos.
She said she's not an enemy of
public schools.
So, what concerns you?
RANDI WEINGARTEN: Well, that is
clearly contradictory
to the 30 years of evidence,
where she has
called public schools dead ends,
where she
has said that they should be
retired, where
she ran a campaign against
Republicans and
Democrats alike in Detroit where
her hashtag
was #endDPS, end Detroit Public
Schools.
So, I assume that she's saying
that now because
suburban voters, rural voters,
Democrats,
Republicans alike, 90 percent of
the kids
in America attend public
schools.
But her record speaks volumes.
And what we're concerned about
is that record,
because, in Michigan, as you
said, for the
last 25 years, she has worked to
dismantle,
destabilize and defund public
schools at the
very same time as she's worked
to shield for-profit
charters from any kind of
accountability.
And those schools have done very
badly.
And the public schools,
particularly for black
and brown children, have been
very destabilized
in places like Flint, Detroit,
Ecore (ph)
and other places.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rick Hess, you
have heard
these criticisms before, I know.
What is -- you believe her
record indicates
that she ought to be the
secretary of education.
What do you like about her?
FREDERICK HESS, Director of
Education Policy
Studies, American Enterprise
Institute: You
know, I think she's a smart
woman.
She's a thoughtful woman.
She's spent three decades as an
educational
advocate.
Now, it's true that she -- her
vision about
how you advocate to serve all
children well
is very different from Randi's
or the AFT's.
Betsy works from a different
premise.
The premise is that these
dollars do not belong
to systems.
They do not belong to
bureaucracies.
They do not belong to state
education agencies
and local education agencies.
These are -- we spend $650
billion, $700 billion
a year to educate all of our
nation's children,
50 million-odd kids.
If those families think those
children are
better served in a traditional
district school
or a charter school or a private
option, Betsy's
philosophy is that we ought to
regard it as
an opportunity to make sure that
each of these
families and each of these kids
is better
served.
I don't understand why anybody
would necessarily
view any of that as
anti-education or anti-public
education.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, Randi,
you heard this.
What do you make of that
argument?
RANDI WEINGARTEN: Right.
So, at the end of the day, what
Rick is ignoring
is that 23 states have actually
reduced their
investment in public education
since 2008.
And what has happened here is
that what DeVos
advocates is a zero sum game,
take the money
from public schools.
So, what's happened in Detroit?
Kids have huge class sizes.
The buildings are decrepit.
The books that they use are from
the '60s
or the '70s.
So, what happens is that they
don't have a
real viable experience.
And, at the same time, what has
happened is
that there's been private money
that's gone
into charters and gone into
vouchers to actually
overpromise parents things that
they ultimately
don't get.
The place that has the choice
are the schools,
not the parents.
And the point I'm trying to make
is that look
at the record.
The record in terms of vouchers
-- we have
had vouchers for 25 years.
They don't do very well for
kids.
And the record in terms of the
for-profit
charters is that the for-profits
have made
a lot of money, but kids have
suffered.
So, why are we in the midst of
destabilizing,
destabilizing, destabilizing, as
opposed to
rolling up our sleeves and
actually doing
what works?
We have to help every child have
a safe, welcoming
neighborhood public school.
Parents want other option,
that's their right.
But we have a responsibility to
help kids
have qualified, high-quality
neighborhood
public schools.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rick, one of
the arguments
that often is made here, it
seems like there
is a tension between autonomy
and accountability.
Everyone wants autonomy, so that
schools can
innovate and do what they want
to do, but
there should also be
accountability, so that,
if teachers are not doing a
great job, that
somehow we can hold them
accountability.
DeVos has been very strong on
autonomy for
schools, but it seems like her
record indicates
she's much less interested in
holding those
schools accountable when they
don't perform.
RICK HESS: So, I think she's
mixed on accountability.
Jeb Bush, who is probably the
high priest
of Republican educational
accountability,
made an incredibly strong
statement on her
behalf in the last day or two.
She's been on the board of his
Foundation
for Educational Excellence.
She's supported calls for high
standards.
But I think you're right that
there is mixed
feelings, certainly on the
conservative side
of the spectrum, about how much
we want to
have simple, centralized
measures determine
whether or not a school is good
for a kid.
It's interesting to hear, you
know, Randi
talking about this, because the
AFT also has,
I think, voiced concerns about
overreliance
on simple reading and math
scores as the be-all
and end-all for deciding whether
schools are
doing a good job.
And yet, when we talk about
educational accountability,
simply because it is so complex
to try to
hold accountable 100,000
schools, because
we have so few kind of good,
objective measures,
it often that winds up putting
more and more
weight on reading and math
scores.
And I think, for me, part of the
promise of
school choice is that if
educators can create
a school that families want to
send their
kid to, and looking at the test
data and looking
at other metrics of achievement,
families
think that this school is best
for their kids,
I guess I'm uncomfortable with
the idea that
we should -- that we should
religiously try
to deny families a school that
they think
is going to be best for their
kid.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Randi Weingarten,
Rick Hess, thank you both very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
the first
black president changed our
views on race
in America.
But first: how some lesser-known
changes to
health care might fare, given
president-elect
Trump's vow to repeal the
Affordable Care
Act.
One of those involve so-called
super utilizers,
high-cost patients who
frequently turn to
emergency rooms for problems
better handled
by primary care doctors and
social workers.
Special correspondent Sarah
Varney reports.
This story was produced in
collaboration with
our partner Kaiser Health News.
SARAH VARNEY: Protective gown,
rubber gloves,
face mask.
Dayna Gurley is getting dressed
for work.
She's a social worker charged
not with treating
infectious diseases, but with
figuring out
why her clients all but live in
Houston's
hospitals.
DAYNA GURLEY, Social Worker:
What's been going
on?
SARAH VARNEY: This patient, who
asked not
to be identified, has chronic
massive ulcers,
AIDS and hears voices and, at
times, spends
three weeks out of the month at
multiple hospitals
around Houston.
Gurley is part of a promising
effort in the
U.S. health care system, honing
in on so-called
super utilizers, patients with
complex problems
who frequent emergency rooms and
cost public
and private insurers dearly.
Super utilizers make up just 5
percent of
the U.S. population, but they
account for
50 percent of health care
spending.
As health care costs continue to
rise, providers
are trying to find these
patients and get
to the root of their problems.
An effort to do just that
started in New Jersey's
poorest city, Camden.
Family physician Dr. Jeffrey
Brenner was inspired
by how police departments were
using crime
data to detect hot spots.
To find Camden's health care hot
spots, Brenner
dug into ambulance records and
E.R. data to
show how high-cost patients were
shuttling
between city hospitals.
DR.
JEFFREY BRENNER, Camden
Coalition of Healthcare
Providers: In America, we're
medicalizing
social problems, and we're
criminalizing social
problems, and we're wasting huge
amounts of
public resources.
SARAH VARNEY: To steer super
utilizers away
from expensive emergency care,
Brenner's team,
including social workers Latonya
Oliver (ph)
and Bill Nice (ph), seek
patients out in local
neighborhoods.
MAN: There's been a few patients
that I have
had like that.
SARAH VARNEY: They work
intensively with people
like Peter Bowser (ph).
Bowser was once homeless, and
went to the
E.R. 28 times in one year.
MAN: Because I was telling
people when I was
staying in the shelter, I said,
when I get
my place, I said, I'm going to
maintain it.
SARAH VARNEY: But after they
helped get a
permanent roof over his head,
Bowser's trips
to the E.R. all but stopped.
MAN: And I think you would
prefer to spend
your time here than the hospital
any day of
the week.
SARAH VARNEY: This high-touch,
data-driven
approach has yielded big
savings.
E.R. visits for the first group
of patients
dropped by 40 percent, cutting
monthly hospital
bills from $1.2 million to
$500,000.
The Affordable Care Act has
boosted efforts
like this around the country by
funding so-called
accountable care organizations,
teams of health
care professionals who team up
to improve
care, lower costs and reap the
savings.
And it was Brenner's pioneering
work in Camden
that inspired others, including
the program
in Houston, a sprawling city
desperate to
aid its sickest and most
isolated patients.
While the more than 100
hospitals here typically
know their own super utilizers,
they had no
way of knowing the top users
across the entire
city.
Tackling that problem took
unprecedented planning
among typically disjointed city
and county
agencies, hospitals and
nonprofits.
WOMAN: And you know that guy
that you helped
me get appointments for the
other day?
He apparently had warrants out
for his arrest.
WOMAN: Oh, OK.
SARAH VARNEY: Now, many of the
hospitals here,
including the county hospital,
Ben Taub, pool
their data and send it to Kallol
Mahata, a
former oil industry I.T.
engineer with the
Patient Care Intervention
Center, who combines
it into one database.
MAN: And we saw that breakdown
by EMS.
SARAH VARNEY: Mahata and Dr.
David Buck, the
group's founder, help to
identify patients
at the top of the list, the
outliers of the
outliers.
Some of the data comes from the
Houston Fire
Department's 911 calls.
Then, teams are dispatched to
parks and neighborhoods
to find the patients.
Firefighters and paramedics like
Thomas Pierrel
(ph) often know these residents
from those
emergency calls, but, this time,
their mission
is different.
MAN: We make appointments.
We find specialists.
We try to maximize the resources
that you
have.
SARAH VARNEY: The results of
these intensive
interventions can be stunning.
Timmy Williams was dying when
Dayna Gurley
found him.
DAYNA GURLEY: Has your blood
pressure been
that high in the past three or
four weeks?
TIMMY WILLIAMS, Houston
Resident: Mm-hmm.
DAYNA GURLEY: It has been?
TIMMY WILLIAMS: Yes, the B.E. is
high.
The B.E. is up there.
SARAH VARNEY: He was holed up at
home and
reeling from untreated HIV that
had progressed
to AIDS.
He couldn't take care of his
young son, and
cycled through Houston's
hospitals.
DAYNA GURLEY: When we first met
Timmy, he
was very hard to engage.
We knew that he probably wasn't
taking any
of his medication, and he was
very skinny.
SARAH VARNEY: Gurley arranged
for a home aide
to care for Williams seven days
a week, got
his apartment cleaned and the
lights turned
back on.
Now Williams' HIV is
undetectable and his
health, and life, have been
steadied.
Although these efforts involve
many staff
members, in the two years since
the Patient
Care Intervention Center has
been up and running,
costs for those in the program
have gone down
83 percent and hospital visits
by 70 percent.
DAYNA GURLEY: I really want to
get to know
them and spend time with them.
SARAH VARNEY: But it can be
difficult to keep
these programs moving.
Often, those savings go straight
to insurance
companies and government payers.
And Dr. Buck and Dayna Gurley
were once banned
from a Houston hospital that was
afraid of
losing money if their high-cost
patients stopped
showing up.
DR.
DAVID BUCK, Patient Care
Intervention Center:
Nobody wants to take ownership
of any of it.
The people just want ownership
of what they
have authority over.
And that's really the issue.
SARAH VARNEY: Back in Camden,
even Dr. Brenner
is less optimistic than he once
was.
His office now overflows with
pillows and
kitchenware for clients they're
trying to
place in housing, and he thinks
homelessness
and entrenched financial
interests in health
care are the biggest barriers.
DR.
JEFFREY BRENNER: I think this is
going to
take a lot longer than I ever
imagined.
I think we're in a 20-year arc
of recalibrating
and rethinking what is health
and what is
health care, what is the purpose
of our health
care system, what are we trying
to accomplish?
SARAH VARNEY: But Brenner still
believes these
intensive efforts are the best
way to help
patients like Timmy Williams.
He's now healthy enough to make
his way around
the city on his own.
He says Gurley did more than
rescue him from
his darkest days.
TIMMY WILLIAMS: I had to put it
in my head
that no one is going to do it
for me.
I have to do it for myself.
I have got to step out and do it
myself.
Read this here.
STUDENT: This whole thing?
TIMMY WILLIAMS: Yes.
SARAH VARNEY: At home now with
his son, his
illness no longer gets in the
way of being
the father he wants to be.
But efforts like these could be
undercut if
president-elect Donald Trump and
the Republican
Congress follow through on their
vow to repeal
the Affordable Care Act.
And it's unclear what would come
next.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Kaiser Health News,
I'm Sarah Varney in Houston,
Texas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our series
The Obama
Years.
Tonight, we look back at the
legacy of the
nation's first black president.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I, Barack Hussein Obama...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Decades before he
made history
as the first African-American
president, Barack
Obama was a man of uncommon
circumstances.
Born to a Kenyan father and a
white mother
from Kansas, Obama's childhood
was split between
Indonesia and Hawaii, where he
was raised
by his white grandparents.
The young Obama was largely
shielded from
the racial injustices of 1960s
America, says
Ta-Nehisi Coates of "The
Atlantic" magazine.
TA-NEHISI COATES, "The
Atlantic": To not go
to schools and wonder why your
schools are
terrible, to not have to deal
with the fear,
the violence, to not really have
to deal with
the police.
So, he was aware of it, but it
wasn't personal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Longtime friend
and senior
White House adviser Valerie
Jarrett says his
upbringing made Obama uniquely
equipped to
navigate what lay ahead.
VALERIE JARRETT, Senior
Presidential Adviser:
He was used to living in a
family where white
people loved him and cared
deeply about him.
And so he goes into every
situation with the
assumption that he is going to
be respected
and treated well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After law school,
Obama moved
to Chicago.
He became a civil rights
attorney, a community
organizer and, eventually, a
state senator
representing the South Side of
Chicago.
Obama gained national attention
in 2004, when
he delivered the keynote address
at the Democratic
National Convention.
BARACK OBAMA: There's not a
black America
and a white America and Latino
America and
Asian America.
There's the United States of
America.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In 2007, after
serving just
two years in the Senate, Obama
decided to
test America's readiness to
accept a black
man as president.
For months, he campaigned on a
message of
hope and change.
But it wasn't until the
surfacing of racially
charged sermons by his former
minister that
he addressed race head on.
BARACK OBAMA: The anger is real.
It is powerful.
And to simply wish it away, to
condemn it
without understanding its roots,
only serves
to widen the chasm of
misunderstanding that
exists between the races.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the moment
he took office,
expectations were high.
EUGENIA PETE, Obama Supporter: I
have a little
boy.
He can -- he can do what he
wants to do.
You know, he don't have to be
just a rap star
or basketball player, you know?
He can do it.
The sky is truly the limit now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the president
had to strike
a balance between being a voice
for black
Americans and president of the
entire country,
says Ta-Nehisi Coates of "The
Atlantic."
TA-NEHISI COATES: He was always
walking this
line, and he had to walk the
line.
You know what I mean?
Like, you're president of the
United States.
It is true that the majority of
people who
you serve, who you represent,
that's not the
South Side of Chicago anymore.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the first
tests came
just months into Mr. Obama's
first term, when
a white police officer arrested
black Harvard
Professor Henry Louis Gates
trying to get
into his own home.
BARACK OBAMA: The Cambridge
police acted stupidly.
What I think we know, separate
and apart from
this incident, is that there is
a long history
in this country of
African-Americans and Latinos
being stopped by law enforcement
disproportionately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After backlash
from the law
enforcement community, the
president said
he had overreacted.
He invited Gates and the officer
who had arrested
him to the White House for what
would become
known as the beer summit.
The president experienced
unusual vitriol
from his opponents, including an
outburst
from South Carolina
Representative Joe Wilson
that members of both parties
called disrespectful.
REP.
JOE WILSON (R), South Carolina:
You lie!
(BOOING)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the remainder
of his first
term, the president rarely used
the bully
pulpit to talk about race.
He focused instead on broader
issues, like
the economy and reforming the
nation's health
care system.
But the president's domestic
record in his
second term would be largely
defined by a
series of events that
spotlighted racial tensions.
In 2012, when neighborhood watch
volunteer
George Zimmerman shot and killed
Trayvon Martin,
an unarmed black teenager, the
president spoke
out in a surprisingly personal
way.
Valerie Jarrett was with him
just beforehand.
VALERIE JARRETT: And I was in
the Oval Office
with a couple of other senior
staff.
And he said to us, in an
extraordinarily emotional
way: "I want to talk about this
because, if
I had a son, he would look like
Trayvon."
BARACK OBAMA: When I think about
this boy,
I think about my own kids.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Again, Ta-Nehisi
Coates:
TA-NEHISI COATES: The moment he
spoke out,
it completely politicized the
trial.
You know what I mean?
And Trayvon became a symbol of
Obamaism, or
something like that.
Like, it became racialized in a
sort of way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In 2014, Michael
Brown, another
unarmed black teen, was shot and
killed by
a Ferguson, Missouri, police
officer.
A year later, a black man named
Freddie Gray
died in police custody in
Baltimore.
And, in Charleston, South
Carolina, a white
man massacred nine black
parishioners during
a Bible study.
BARACK OBAMA (singing): Amazing
grace, how
sweet the sound.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jarrett says
these events brought
to the surface racial unease
that already
existed.
VALERIE JARRETT: Those tensions
were there
before we had a video camera.
We just didn't see them on the
news and in
the social media the way we are
today.
And I think a lot of that has
encouraged particularly
young people to come out and
peacefully demonstrate,
to get involved with their local
government,
to hold them more accountable
than perhaps
they were.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
President Obama's
Justice Department aggressively
prosecuted
civil rights abuses.
He highlighted racial
disparities within the
criminal justice system.
And Mr. Obama spearheaded
initiatives like
My Brother's Keeper, a
mentorship program
for young men of color.
But in his farewell speech this
month, the
president acknowledged there was
much left
to accomplish.
BARACK OBAMA: Race relations are
better than
they were 10, or 20, or 30 years
ago, no matter
what some folks say.
But we're not where we need to
be, and all
of us have more work to do.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yesterday, I sat
down yesterday
with three individuals who have
given a lot
of thought to Mr. Obama's legacy
and his impact
on black Americans.
We're joined by James Peterson.
He's director of Africana
studies at Lehigh
University and the host of
"Remix."
It's a podcast dedicated to race
and politics.
Rael Nelson James, she oversees
diversity
work for the Bridgespan Group.
It's anyone profit philanthropic
advisory
firm.
And Sherrilyn Ifill, president
of the NAACP
Legal Defense Fund.
And we welcome all three of you.
James Peterson, how do you look
back on his
presidency overall?
JAMES PETERSON, Director of
Africana Studies,
Lehigh University: You know,
Folks from my
parents' generation couldn't
imagine there
being a black president of the
United States.
And so I think we have to honor
that piece
of it.
But for progressive folks, the
substance of
the policies sometimes just
isn't there.
And I think, as we sort of
transition into
the next administration, we're
going to be
kind of queued up to be very,
very nostalgic
about President Obama.
But we have to understand there
were lots
of challenge, not just based on
obstructionism,
but based on sort of the kind of
centrist
politics that have dominated
Democratic Party
politics for the last couple of
decades that
President Obama really
represented.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sherrilyn Ifill,
what about
that?
SHERRILYN IFILL, President,
NAACP Legal Defense
and Educational Fund: Well, it's
interesting.
I actually think we're going to
need more
time to assess the substantive
record as well.
I think it's kind of hard to
fully assess
it at this moment.
I think, when you think about
health care
reform, when you think about one
of the president's
first acts was signing the Lilly
Ledbetter
Equal Pay Act for Women, when
you look at
the work in the criminal justice
space, which
was largely executed through the
Department
of Justice, but through this
president's Department
of Justice and with his full
support and with
his interest and strong desire,
you look at
the Smart on Crime policies,
ending solitary
confinement for juveniles, you
look at his
clemency, he's granted clemency
to more people
than any of the 11 presidents
before him combined.
Now, the federal system, the
federal prison
system and the federal criminal
justice system,
is a fraction compared to the
system in the
states.
But the purpose was really to
set an example,
to show what can be done and
what should be
done around criminal justice.
Same for voting rights and the
effort to really
stand against this effort of
voter suppression
of African-American voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Rael Nelson
James, we're
talking about his overall legacy
and what
that meant in many instances for
black Americans,
whether it was aimed at
specifically black
Americans or not.
RAEL NELSON JAMES, Bridgespan
Group: It's
a tightrope walk to be the first
black person
to be in a position,
particularly the presidency,
and to balance what it means to
be the president
of the entire United States, and
what it means
to be black community to see the
first black
person as president.
And what those expectations
were, I felt,
weren't always fair in terms of
what it truly
means to hold that office, and
the kind of
balance that one has to have,
and because,
as was said, President Obama's a
political
moderate.
And so those who are on the left
who are truly
progressive, I think, should
have expected
that he would fall short of
their expectations.
This sort of desire that he
would speak to
or evangelize a sort of black
community platform
above all else, I think, was
sort of an unfair
expectation, though I think we
got at times
really strong messages, you
know, about being
black in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: James Peterson,
were the expectations
unfair?
JAMES PETERSON: Some of the
expectations were
absolutely unfair, not just from
black America,
but from white America, and not
just from
those on the left, but from
those on the right.
He sort of took on the historic
moment, in
a sense that the expectations
for some kind
of post-racial, utopian,
harmonious society
kind of was on his shoulders,
especially early
on in his first term
I think we were disabused of
that notion fairly
early on.
And I think folks came to their
senses a little
bit.
But when we -- even if we just
take a look
at his messaging that has been
directed towards
African-Americans, too often,
President Obama
trucked in the kind of
discourses that those
on the right used, in terms of
the behavioral
challenges, or lack thereof,
that sometimes
people want to hang structural
responsibility
around.
You know, he's often sort of
articulating
a narrative of personal
responsibility.
And there's nothing wrong with
personal responsibility,
but all of us are also aware of
the fact that
there are structural challenges
in the United
States that have -- are sort of
part of income
inequality, part of racial
stratification.
And I think it's legitimate for
folks to have
expected President Barack Obama
to speak more
strongly about those things,
even in the environment
of obstructionism, even in an
environment
where there's a rise of
racialized hate over
the last eight years, based on
the fact that
he is the first black president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sherrilyn Ifill,
what about
this notion that he, as James
Peterson just
put it, trucked in the language
of those on
the right?
SHERRILYN IFILL: Well, I always
wanted more
from this president and
probably...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you had many
meetings with
him.
SHERRILYN IFILL: In many
meetings with him
around criminal justice reform,
around judicial
nominations, around any number
of issues.
And I always wanted more, and
will probably
want more of any president.
So I'm always pushing a
president to do more.
Do I think he could have done
more?
I always went very clearly with
a question
about what was available for the
president
to do, and within the context of
what he could
do, was he will willing to go up
to the line?
I think there are some issues in
which he
was doing as much as he possibly
could.
The headwinds from the right
were unbelievable.
And so what we might have
wanted, particularly
in the space of legislation,
just couldn't
happen with this Congress.
Rhetorically, it's a whole
'nother story.
People wanted to hear what they
wanted to
hear.
I think, in many ways, the
president's rhetoric
was precisely what he promised
it would be
on the campaign trail.
I think people just didn't want
to hear it,
because many of us put all our
hopes and dreams
and wishes for this first black
president
into him.
I think he was remarkably
consistent in who
he said he was and what he
believed.
And for that, I was grateful,
because I always
felt like I knew who I was
dealing with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
said in an
interview just recently that he
thinks race
relations in this country are
somewhat better,
far from perfect, but are better
after his
presidency.
Rael Nelson James, what do you
think?
RAEL NELSON JAMES: I think what
we learned
from President Obama's time in
office is that
no one person, no one black
person or progressive
person in office can change the
structural
climate of our institutions that
really matter
to people of color and other
marginalized
communities enjoying full and
equal rights
in our country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: James Peterson?
JAMES PETERSON: We have seen a
rise in racialized
and racist discourses online,
and we have
seen a rise of hate groups in
response to
the first black president.
And I think there's two ways of
looking at
that.
I think some folks will look at
that and say,
hey, the excavation of the
residue of white
supremacy and racism is an
important piece.
We need for those folks to come
out of the
shadows, so that people can
understand that
racism is real, and so folks can
appreciate
the work still that is left to
be done.
But we also can't blame
President Obama because
discourses have become more
racialized because
he's the first black president,
right?
I mean, that's just a reality of
change and
progress.
And so things are not
necessarily worse off
in terms of racial discourses.
But when we look at specific
issues, if you
look at income inequality, when
you look at
black wealth and black
resources, some of
those things have declined over
these last
eight years.
And the challenge for us is not
to blame President
Obama for that, but to
understand that he's
kind of a lightning rod for
racial issues
because he's the first black
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sherrilyn Ifill,
racial relations
at the end of his term?
SHERRILYN IFILL: Well, you know,
I would take
an issue like policing reform.
Are our relations better?
No.
I think it's been contentious.
These are tough, hard
conversations.
But this is an issue that has
stayed below
the surface, has not been in the
mainstream,
has not been seen, and has not
been grappled
with in the past in ways that it
has been
over the past four or five
years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, just
quickly, does he
get credit for bringing those
issues out and
the fact that there is more
conversation around
them now?
SHERRILYN IFILL: Well, if I take
something
like policing reform, it wasn't
the president
that really brought it out, but
it was how
the president responded once it
was brought
out.
When Ferguson happened, and he
was able to
say, you know, we want to make
sure that people
are not committing crimes, but,
at the same
time, we want to make sure that
police are
not using excessive force, when
he sent Eric
Holder down to Ferguson to meet
with people,
when he engaged the Department
of Justice
in doing twice as many pattern
and practice
investigations of
unconstitutional policing
as have ever happened before,
those are the
ways in which he responded to
something that
was presented.
And I think, as we approach the
new presidency,
we might see a very different
response.
And then we will know that there
really was
a difference in having President
Obama in
the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's
impossible to condense
eight years into one
conversation, but thank
you, all three of you.
Sherrilyn Ifill, Rael Nelson
James, James
Peterson, we thank you all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.